Create rule S7033: "if consteval" should be used instead of "if (std::is_constant_evaluated())" (CPP-4960) (#4092)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S7033/cfamily/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

Since {cpp}20, a call to `std::is_constant_evaluated()` can be used to determine whether the call occurs within a constant-evaluated context.

Typically, this function is called in the condition of an `if` statement to optimize code:
It allows different actions to be performed depending on whether an expression is evaluated at compile-time or runtime.
However, writing `if (std::is_constant_evaluated())` comes with a few caveats.

Firstly, it can be error-prone.
One may be tempted to write `if constexpr` instead of `if` but doing this always results in the condition being `true`.
S6169 explains this and other similar problems in greater depth.

Secondly, because it looks like any regular `if` statement with a function call, it does not stand out as something semantically different and important.

For these reasons, {cpp}23 introduced the `if consteval` control-flow statement.

> There is also a negated form: `if not consteval`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also a negated form: `if not consteval` (or `if ! consteval`).
```

These versions should be preferred since they are not error-prone, stand out with their different and concise syntax, and do not require including `<type_traits>`.

> As a bonus point, the positive form also allows invoking immediate functions (see S6169).

Reviewer: I would not put it as just a bonus point but as another major problem with `if (std::is_constant_evaluated())`

Reviewer 2: Improved in e469859515

This rule raises an issue when `if (std::is_constant_evaluated())` or `if (!std::is_constant_evaluated())` are used.

//=== Exceptions
//
// The implementation ignores "complex" conditions such as

> // if (std::is_constant_evaluated() && n > 0)

Reviewer: Should it be ignored, or should it raise an issue as soon as `std::is_constant_evaluated()` is called anywhere within an if condition?

Reviewer 2: According to the paper, this is very rare, so we may ignore it, if it was complex to implement. The impl should be simpler enough to ignore such cases.

However, the more appealing argument is that the paper also opens the door for future changes, like having a condition in `if consteval`. So to be future-proof, we can limit the scope now and update the rule one day if needed to cover more cases and consider future limitations, if any, imposed by the standard.

Reviewer 3: As I see it, we don't need to raise as soon as `std::is_constant_evaluated()`, but only when we have the form `if (std::is_constant_evaluated() && (anything))` (or `if ((not std::is_constant_evaluated()) && (anything))`)
It is a bit more complex and not necessary for the MVP, but it would be a nice addition.
If `if consteval` gets a condition, we will anyway create a rule to merge the `consteval` with the `if` it immediately contains, so our fix would not break the future proofness.

Reviewer 2: To avoid increasing the time spent on this ticket, I'll not implement this part. And FWIW, I still think it is a bit controversial, too: Raising on such expressions may be both seen as FP or TP, so it seems preferable to stick to potential FN vs TN and not raise.

Reviewer 4: I think that this should be documented exception.

Reviewer 4: I see, I agree with the reasoning.

//
// However, this is not exposed here because such uses are really rare
// and it would not benefit most readers.
//
// See https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2021/p1938r3.html#conditioned-form

== How to fix it

Fixing the issue is fairly simple: the {cpp}23 syntax is an almost direct replacement of the older one.

> The only caveat is that braces `{ }` must be used with `if (not) consteval` to delimit the body of the "then" and "else" branches.

Reviewer: I don't like the not here, especially with parentheses and inside a code block...
```suggestion
The only caveat is that braces `{ }` must be used with `if consteval` to delimit the body of the "then" and "else" branches.
```

Reviewer 2: Indeed, makes sense. I'll make S6169 consistent.

> The only caveat is that braces `{ }` must be used with `if (not) consteval` to delimit the body of the "then" and "else" branches.

Reviewer: Small wording changes:
- I think it explains the 'why' of the difference
- It also shows that we are not talking of extra mandatory braces, just of making something that was optional mandatory.

```suggestion
The only caveat is that, since `if consteval` is missing parentheses to separate the condition from the action, the braces `{ }` are not optional to delimit the body of the "then" and "else" branches.
```

Reviewer 2: 33df3974c6

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {

>   if (std::is_constant_evaluated()) { // Noncompliant version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (std::is_constant_evaluated()) { // Noncompliant
```

    // Compile-time implementation
  } else {
    // Runtime implementation
  }
}

constexpr void action(int parameter) {

>   if (!std::is_constant_evaluated()) // Noncompliant version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (!std::is_constant_evaluated()) // Noncompliant
```

    std::cout << "Run action at runtime for " << parameter << std::endl;

  // Some code...
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
constexpr double power(double b, int x) {
  if consteval {
    // Compile-time implementation
  } else {
    // Runtime implementation
  }
}

constexpr void action(int parameter) {

>   if not consteval {

Reviewer: Since the noncompliant example uses `!`, I think the compliant one should use it too, otherwise it can be implied that it's not supported...
```suggestion
  if ! consteval {
```

Reviewer 2: I wanted to write `not` because `!` feels weird between two "English" tokens.
In other words, `if not consteval` feels more natural than `if ! consteval`.

`not` is also the first form introduced in the paper and the only one used in plain text (except in the wording), so it seems more natural to other people too, probably.

This is (subjectively) less the case with the noncompliant example...

There is also the question of the space, shouldn't it be `if !consteval`? With `not`, we sidestep this (very minor) point.

I think with your suggestion to write:

> There is also a negated form: `if not consteval` (or `if ! consteval`).

the ambiguity is low.

---

RSPEC aside, what should the quick fix write? Do you agree `not` is more suitable?

Reviewer 3: As a data point, I would also write
`if (!std::is_constant_evaluated())`
and
`if not consteval`

Reviewer: Not 100% convinced, but ok.
About the quick fix, I'm fine with not, but:
- I hope that most cases will be with the positive case
- Did you consider the possibility of reversing the `if` if it has 2 branches? This is what I would most probably do when applying the fix manually?

Reviewer 2: > Did you consider the possibility of reversing the if if it has 2 branches? This is what I would most probably do when applying the fix manually?

This would also be a better practice IMO, but this is a rule in its own right and not limited to `consteval` that is orthogonal here I would say. It is also subjective. Maybe in some cases one may prefer having a negation and a short "then" branch and a longer "else" branch rather than the opposite.

>   if not consteval {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if not consteval { // The {} are required here
```

== Why is this an issue?

Since {cpp}20, a call to `std::is_constant_evaluated()` can be used to determine whether the call occurs within a constant-evaluated context.

Typically, this function is called in the condition of an `if` statement to optimize code:
It allows different actions to be performed depending on whether an expression is evaluated at compile-time or runtime.
However, writing `if (std::is_constant_evaluated())` comes with a few caveats.

. It can be error-prone:
One may be tempted to write `if constexpr` instead of `if` but doing this always results in the condition being `true`.
S6169 explains this and other similar problems in greater depth.

. Because it looks like any regular `if` statement with a function call, it does not stand out as something semantically different and important.

> . It is not as powerful as it looks:
> Immediate functions (see again S6169) cannot be invoked from such `if` statements.

Reviewer: I don't see the point of the first part of the bullet:
```suggestion
. Immediate functions (see again S6169) cannot be invoked from such `if` statements, which is counterintuitive and overly restrictive.
```

Reviewer 2: The idea was twofold: be somewhat consistent with point 1, and highlight the problem. But point 2 is not consistent either and your sentence looks better! :-)
